The Project Gutenberg eBook of Between Two Thieves, by Richard Dehan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Between Two Thieves

Author: Richard Dehan

Release Date: April 1, 2023 [eBook #70431]

Language: English

Produced by: Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
             Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BETWEEN TWO THIEVES ***





                          BETWEEN TWO THIEVES




                                   BY
                             RICHARD DEHAN

                      AUTHOR OF “ONE BRAVER THING”
                            (THE DOP DOCTOR)

                             [Illustration]


                                NEW YORK
                      FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY
                               PUBLISHERS




                         _Copyright, 1912, by_
                      FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY

    _All rights reserved, including that of translation into foreign
                 languages, including the Scandinavian_

                   [Illustration: _September, 1912_]




                          BETWEEN TWO THIEVES




I


An old paralytic man, whose snow-white hair fell in long silken waves
from under the rim of the black velvet skull-cap he invariably wore,
sat in a light invalid chair-carriage at the higher end of the wide,
steep street that is the village of Zeiden, in the Canton of Alpenzell,
looking at the sunset.

Slowly the rose-red flush was fading behind the glittering green,
snow-capped pinnacle of distant Riedi. A segment of the sun’s huge
flaming disk remained in view above a shoulder of her colossal neighbor
Donatus; molten gold and silver, boiling together as in a crucible,
were spilled upon his vast, desolate, icy sides; his towering,
snow-crested helmet trailed a _panache_ of dazzling glory, snatched
from the sinking forehead of the vanquished Lord of Day, and even the
cap of the Kreinenberg, dwarf esquire in attendance on the giant,
boasted a golden plume.

The old man blinked a little, oppressed by excess of splendor, and the
attendant Sister of Charity, who sometimes relieved the white-capped,
blue-cloaked, cotton-gowned German nurse customarily in charge of the
patient, observing this, turned the invalid-chair so that its occupant
looked down upon the Blau See, the shape of which suggests a sumptuous
glove encrusted with turquoises, as, bordered with old-world, walled
towns, it lies in the rich green lap of a fertile country, deep girdled
with forests of larch and pine and chestnut, enshrining stately ruins
of mediæval castles, and the picturesque garden-villas built by wealthy
peasants, in their stately shadow; and sheltered by the towering
granite ranges of the Paarlberg from raging easterly gales.

The brilliant black eyes that shone almost with the brilliancy of
youth in the wasted ivory face of the old man in the wheeled chair,
sparkled appreciatively now as they looked out over the Lake. For to
the whirring of its working dynamos, and the droning song of its
propeller, a monoplane of the Blériot type emerged from its wooden
shelter, pitched upon a steep green incline near to the water’s edge;
and moving on its three widely-placed cycle-wheels with the gait of a
leggy winged beetle or a flurried sheldrake, suddenly rose with its
rider into the thin, clear atmosphere, losing all its awkwardness as
the insect or the bird would have done, in the launch upon its natural
element, and the instinctive act of flight. The old man watched the
bird of steel and canvas, soaring and dipping, circling and turning,
over the blue liquid plain with the sure ease and swift daring of the
swallow, and slowly nodded his head. When the monoplane had completed a
series of practice-evolutions, it steered away northwards, the steady
tuff-tuff of its Gnome engine thinning away to a mere thread of sound
as the machine diminished to the sight. Then said the watcher, breaking
his long silence:

“That is a good thing!... A capital--a useful thing!... An invention,
see you, my Sister, that will one day prove invaluable in War.”

The Sister, with a shade of hesitation, responded that Monsieur was
undoubtedly right. For carrying dispatches, and for the more dreadful
purpose of dropping bombs upon an enemy, the aeroplane, guided by a
skillful pilot, would no doubt----

“Ah, tschah!... Bah!... br’rr!...” The old man hunched his thin,
broad shoulders impatiently, and wrinkled up his mobile ivory face
into a hundred puckers of comical disgust as he exploded these verbal
rockets, and his bright black eyes snapped and sparkled angrily. “For
dropping shell upon the decks of armored cruisers, or into camps, or
upon columns of marching men, this marvelous machine that the Twentieth
Century has given us might be utilized beyond doubt. But for the
preservation of life, rather than its destruction, its supreme use will
be in War. For the swift and easy removal of wounded from the field of
battle, a fleet of Army Hospital Service Aeroplanes will one day be
built and equipped and organized by every civilized Government, under
the Rules of the Crimson Cross. Beautiful, beautiful!” The old man
was quite excited, nodding his black velvet-capped, white-locked head
as though he would have nodded it off, and blinking his bright eyes.
“_Sapristi!_--I see them!” he cried. “They will hover over the Field
of Action like huge hawks, from time to time swooping upon the fallen
and carrying them off in their talons. Superb! magnificent! colossal!
If we had had air-men and air-machines at Balaklava in ’54, or at
Magenta, or Solferino, or Gravelotte, or in Paris during the Siege!...
Have the kindness, my Sister, to give me a pinch of snuff!”

The Sister fumbled in the pocket of the white flannel jacket--winter
and summer, year in and year out, the old man went clothed from head to
foot in white--and fed the thin, handsome old eagle-beak with pungent
cheap mixture, out of a box that bore the portrait, set in blazing
brilliants, of the Imperial Crowned Head whose gift it had been; as was
recorded by the elaborate inscription engraved in the Russian character
within its golden lid. The old man was particular that no dust of his
favorite brown powder should soil the snowy silken mustache, waxed
to fine points, that jutted above his long, mobile upper-lip, or the
little imperial that was called by a much less elegant name when the
birch-broom-bearded Reds heckled the President of the Third Republic
for wearing the distinctive chin-tuft. After the pinch of snuff the old
man became more placid. He had his chair slewed round to afford him a
fresh point of view, and sat absorbed in the contemplation of which he
never seemed to weary.

The sweet Spring day was dying. Vast brooding pinions of somber purple
cloud already made twilight on the north horizon, where glooming
ramparts topped by pallid peaks, and jagged sierras spiring up into
slender minarets and aguilles, shone ghostly against the gloom. The
horn of the herdsman sounded from the lower Alps, and neck-bells
tinkled as the long lines of placid cows moved from the upper pastures
in obedience to the call, breathing perfume of scented vetch and
honeyed crimson clover, leaving froth of milk from trickling udders on
the leaves and grasses as they went.

The sunset-hour being supper-time, the single street of Zeiden seemed
deserted. You saw it as a hilly thoroughfare, bordered with detached
timber-built houses, solid and quaintly-shaped and gayly-painted,
their feet planted in gardens full of lilac and syringa and laburnum,
daffodils and narcissi, violets and anemones and tulips; their walls
and balconies tapestried with the sweet May rose and the pink and
white clematis; the high-pitched roofs of the most ancient structures,
green to the ridge-poles with mosses and gilded by lichens, rosetted
with houseleek, and tufted with sweet yellow wallflower and flaunting
dandelion. And you had just begun to wonder at the silence and apparent
emptiness of the place, when, presto! it suddenly sprang into life.
Doors opened and shut; footsteps crackled on gravel; gates clicked,
releasing avalanches of barking dogs and laughing, racing children; the
adult natives and visitors of Zeiden (Swiss for the most part, leavened
with Germans and sprinkled with English and French) appeared upon
the Promenade.... And the band of the Kursaal, magnificent in their
green, white-faced, silver-tagged uniform, marched down the street to
the Catholic Church, and being admitted by the verger--a magnificent
official carrying a wand, and attired in a scarlet frock-coat, gilt
chain, and lace-trimmed cocked hat--presently appeared upon the
platform of the tower, and--it being the Feast of The Ascension--played
a chorale, and were tremendously applauded when it was over.

“They play well, finely, to-night!” said the old man, nodding and
twinkling in his bright pleased way. “Kindly clap my hands for me,
my Sister. M. Pédelaborde may take it amiss if I do not join in the
applause.” So the _chef d’orchestre_ was gratified by the approval
of the paralytic M. Dunoisse, which indeed he would have been sorely
chagrined to miss.

       *       *       *       *       *

“I think that white-haired old man in the black velvet cap has the most
noble, spiritual face I ever saw,” said a little English lady to her
husband--a tall, lean, prematurely-bald and careworn man, arrayed in a
leather cap with