The Project Gutenberg eBook of Between Two Thieves, by Richard Dehan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Between Two Thieves

Author: Richard Dehan

Release Date: April 1, 2023 [eBook #70431]

Language: English

Produced by: Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
             Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BETWEEN TWO THIEVES ***





                          BETWEEN TWO THIEVES




                                   BY
                             RICHARD DEHAN

                      AUTHOR OF “ONE BRAVER THING”
                            (THE DOP DOCTOR)

                             [Illustration]


                                NEW YORK
                      FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY
                               PUBLISHERS




                         _Copyright, 1912, by_
                      FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY

    _All rights reserved, including that of translation into foreign
                 languages, including the Scandinavian_

                   [Illustration: _September, 1912_]




                          BETWEEN TWO THIEVES




I


An old paralytic man, whose snow-white hair fell in long silken waves
from under the rim of the black velvet skull-cap he invariably wore,
sat in a light invalid chair-carriage at the higher end of the wide,
steep street that is the village of Zeiden, in the Canton of Alpenzell,
looking at the sunset.

Slowly the rose-red flush was fading behind the glittering green,
snow-capped pinnacle of distant Riedi. A segment of the sun’s huge
flaming disk remained in view above a shoulder of her colossal neighbor
Donatus; molten gold and silver, boiling together as in a crucible,
were spilled upon his vast, desolate, icy sides; his towering,
snow-crested helmet trailed a _panache_ of dazzling glory, snatched
from the sinking forehead of the vanquished Lord of Day, and even the
cap of the Kreinenberg, dwarf esquire in attendance on the giant,
boasted a golden plume.

The old man blinked a little, oppressed by excess of splendor, and the
attendant Sister of Charity, who sometimes relieved the white-capped,
blue-cloaked, cotton-gowned German nurse customarily in charge of the
patient, observing this, turned the invalid-chair so that its occupant
looked down upon the Blau See, the shape of which suggests a sumptuous
glove encrusted with turquoises, as, bordered with old-world, walled
towns, it lies in the rich green lap of a fertile country, deep girdled
with forests of larch and pine and chestnut, enshrining stately ruins
of mediæval castles, and the picturesque garden-villas built by wealthy
peasants, in their stately shadow; and sheltered by the towering
granite ranges of the Paarlberg from raging easterly gales.

The brilliant black eyes that shone almost with the brilliancy of
youth in the wasted ivory face of the old man in the wheeled chair,
sparkled appreciatively now as they looked out over the Lake. For to
the whirring of its working dynamos, and the droning song of its
propeller, a monoplane of the Blériot type emerged from its wooden
shelter, pitched upon a steep green incline near to the water’s edge;
and moving on its three widely-placed cycle-wheels with the gait of a
leggy winged beetle or a flurried sheldrake, suddenly rose with its
rider into the thin, clear atmosphere, losing all its awkwardness as
the insect or the bird would have done, in the launch upon its natural
element, and the instinctive act of flight. The old man watched the
bird of steel and canvas, soaring and dipping, circling and turning,
over the blue liquid plain with the sure ease and swift daring of the
swallow, and slowly nodded his head. When the monoplane had completed a
series of practice-evolutions, it steered away northwards, the steady
tuff-tuff of its Gnome engine thinning away to a mere thread of sound
as the machine diminished to the sight. Then said the watcher, breaking
his long silence:

“That is a good thing!... A capital--a useful thing!... An invention,
see you, my Sister, that will one day prove invaluable in War.”

The Sister, with a shade of hesitation, responded that Monsieur was
undoubtedly right. For carrying dispatches, and for the more dreadful
purpose of dropping bombs upon an enemy, the aeroplane, guided by a
skillful pilot, would no doubt----

“Ah, tschah!... Bah!... br’rr!...” The old man hunched his thin,
broad shoulders impatiently, and wrinkled up his mobile ivory face
into a hundred puckers of comical disgust as he exploded these verbal
rockets, and his bright black eyes snapped and sparkled angrily. “For
dropping shell upon the decks of armored cruisers, or into camps, or
upon columns of marching men, this marvelous machine that the Twentieth
Century has given us might be utilized beyond doubt. But for the
preservation of life, rather than its destruction, its supreme use will
be in War. For the swift and easy removal of wounded from the field of
battle, a fleet of Army Hospital Service Aeroplanes will one day be
built and equipped and organized by every civilized Government, under
the Rules of the Crimson Cross. Beautiful, beautiful!” The old man
was quite excited, nodding his black velvet-capped, white-locked head
as though he would have nodded it off, and blinking his bright eyes.
“_Sapristi!_--I see them!” he cried. “They will hover over the Field
of Action like huge hawks, from time to time swooping upon the fallen
and carrying them off in their talons. Superb! magnificent! colossal!
If we had had air-men and air-machines at Balaklava in ’54, or at
Magenta, or Solferino, or Gravelotte, or in Paris during the Siege!...
Have the kindness, my Sister, to give me a pinch of snuff!”

The Sister fumbled in the pocket of the white flannel jacket--winter
and summer, year in and year out, the old man went clothed from head to
foot in white--and fed the thin, handsome old eagle-beak with pungent
cheap mixture, out of a box that bore the portrait, set in blazing
brilliants, of the Imperial Crowned Head whose gift it had been; as was
recorded by the elaborate inscription engraved in the Russian character
within its golden lid. The old man was particular that no dust of his
favorite brown powder should soil the snowy silken mustache, waxed
to fine points, that jutted above his long, mobile upper-lip, or the
little imperial that was called by a much less elegant name when the
birch-broom-bearded Reds heckled the President of the Third Republic
for wearing the distinctive chin-tuft. After the pinch of snuff the old
man became more placid. He had his chair slewed round to afford him a
fresh point of view, and sat absorbed in the contemplation of which he
never seemed to weary.

The sweet Spring day was dying. Vast brooding pinions of somber purple
cloud already made twilight on the north horizon, where glooming
ramparts topped by pallid peaks, and jagged sierras spiring up into
slender minarets and aguilles, shone ghostly against the gloom. The
horn of the herdsman sounded from the lower Alps, and neck-bells
tinkled as the long lines of placid cows moved from the upper pastures
in obedience to the call, breathing perfume of scented vetch and
honeyed crimson clover, leaving froth of milk from trickling udders on
the leaves and grasses as they went.

The sunset-hour being supper-time, the single street of Zeiden seemed
deserted. You saw it as a hilly thoroughfare, bordered with detached
timber-built houses, solid and quaintly-shaped and gayly-painted,
their feet planted in gardens full of lilac and syringa and laburnum,
daffodils and narcissi, violets and anemones and tulips; their walls
and balconies tapestried with the sweet May rose and the pink and
white clematis; the high-pitched roofs of the most ancient structures,
green to the ridge-poles with mosses and gilded by lichens, rosetted
with houseleek, and tufted with sweet yellow wallflower and flaunting
dandelion. And you had just begun to wonder at the silence and apparent
emptiness of the place, when, presto! it suddenly sprang into life.
Doors opened and shut; footsteps crackled on gravel; gates clicked,
releasing avalanches of barking dogs and laughing, racing children; the
adult natives and visitors of Zeiden (Swiss for the most part, leavened
with Germans and sprinkled with English and French) appeared upon
the Promenade.... And the band of the Kursaal, magnificent in their
green, white-faced, silver-tagged uniform, marched down the street to
the Catholic Church, and being admitted by the verger--a magnificent
official carrying a wand, and attired in a scarlet frock-coat, gilt
chain, and lace-trimmed cocked hat--presently appeared upon the
platform of the tower, and--it being the Feast of The Ascension--played
a chorale, and were tremendously applauded when it was over.

“They play well, finely, to-night!” said the old man, nodding and
twinkling in his bright pleased way. “Kindly clap my hands for me,
my Sister. M. Pédelaborde may take it amiss if I do not join in the
applause.” So the _chef d’orchestre_ was gratified by the approval
of the paralytic M. Dunoisse, which indeed he would have been sorely
chagrined to miss.

       *       *       *       *       *

“I think that white-haired old man in the black velvet cap has the most
noble, spiritual face I ever saw,” said a little English lady to her
husband--a tall, lean, prematurely-bald and careworn man, arrayed in a
leather cap with goggles, a knicker suit of baggily-cut, loud-patterned
tweeds, a shirt of rheumatism-defying Jaeger material, golfing hose,
and such prodigiously-clouted nailed boots, with sockets for the
insertion of climbing-irons, as London West End and City firms are apt
to impose upon customers who do their Swiss mountain-climbing per the
zigzag carriage-road, or the cog-wheel railway.

“Ah, yes! quite so!” absently rejoined the husband, who was Liberal
Member for a North London Borough, and an Under-Secretary of State;
and was mentally engaged in debating whether the six o’clock supper
recently partaken of, and consisting of grilled lake-trout with
cucumber, followed by curd-fritters crowned with dabs of whortleberry
preserve, did not constitute a flagrant breach of the rules of dietary
drawn up by the London specialist under whose advice he was trying the
Zeiden whey-cure for a dyspepsia induced by Suffragist Demonstrations
and the Revised Budget Estimate. “Quite so, yes!”

“You are trying to be cynical,” said the little lady, who was serious
and high-minded, and Member of half-a-dozen Committees of Societies for
the moral and physical improvement of a world that would infinitely
prefer to remain as it is “Skeptics may sneer,” she continued with
energy, “and the irreverent scoff, but a holy life does stamp itself
upon the countenance in lines there is no mistaking.”

“I did not sneer,” retorted her husband, whose internal system the
unfortuitous combination of cucumber with curds was rapidly upsetting.
“Nor am I aware that I scoffed. Your saintly-faced old gentleman is
certainly a very interesting and remarkable personage. His name is M.
Hector Dunoisse.” He added, with an inflection the direct result of the
cucumber-curd-whortleberry combination: “He was a natural son of the
First Napoleon’s favorite _aide-de-camp_, a certain Colonel--afterwards
Field-Marshal Dunoisse (who did tremendous things at Aboukir and
Austerlitz and Borodino)--by--ah!--by a Bavarian lady of exalted
rank,--a professed nun, in fact,--who ran away with Dunoisse, or was
run away with. M. Pédelaborde, the man who told me the story, doesn’t
profess to be quite certain.”

“I dare say not! And who is M. Pédelaborde, if I may be allowed to
know?”

Infinite contempt and unbounded incredulity were conveyed in the little
English lady’s utterance of the foregoing words.

“Pédelaborde,” explained her husband, sucking a soda-mint lozenge, and
avoiding the wifely eye, “is the fat, tremendously-mustached personage
who conducts the Kursaal Band.”

“Indeed!”

“He has known M. Hector Dunoisse all his life--Pédelaborde’s life, I
mean, of course. His father was a fellow-cadet of your old gentleman’s
at a Military Training Institute in Paris, where Dunoisse fought a
duel with another boy and killed him, I am given to understand, by an
unfair thrust. The French are fond of tricks in fencing, and some of
’em are the very dev----Ahem!”

“I decline to credit such a monstrous statement,” said the little lady,
holding her head very high. “Nothing shall convince me that that dear,
sweet, placid old man--who is certainly not to blame for the accident
of his birth--could ever have been guilty of a dishonorable action,
much less a wicked murderous deed, such as you describe! Do you know
him? I mean in the sense of having spoken to him, because everybody
bows to M. Dunoisse on the Promenade. You have!.... Next time you
happen to meet, you might say that if he would allow you to introduce
him to your wife, I should be pleased--so very pleased to make his
acquaintance----”

“Ah, yes! Quite so! We have had a little chat or two, certainly,”
the dyspeptic gentleman of affairs admitted. “And I don’t doubt he
would be highly gratified.” The speaker finished his lozenge, and
added, with mild malignity: “That you would find him interesting I
feel perfectly sure. For he certainly has seen a good deal of life,
according to Pédelaborde.... He held a commission in a crack regiment
of Chasseurs d’Afrique, and ran through a great fortune, I am told,
with the assistance of his commanding officer’s wife--uncommonly
attractive woman, too, Pédelaborde tells me. And he was on the
Prince-President’s Staff at the time of the _coup d’État_, and after
the Restoration--Pédelaborde positively takes his oath that this is
true!--was shut up in a French frontier fortress for an attempt on the
life of the Emperor. But he escaped or was released, when the Allies
were pounding away at Sevastopol, in 1854, and Ada Merling--dead now,
I believe, like nearly everybody else one has ever heard named in
connection with the War in the Crimea--was nursing the wounded English
soldiers at Scutari.” The dyspeptic politician added acidly:

“Here comes M. Dunoisse trundling down the Promenade, saintly smile and
all the rest of it.... Shall I give him your message now?”

But the speaker’s better-half, at last convinced, indignantly withdrew
her previous tender of cordiality, and as the invalid chair, impelled
by the white-capped, blue-cloaked nurse, who had now replaced the nun,
rolled slowly down the wide garden-bordered, orchard-backed _Place_
of ancient timber houses that is Zeiden, the white-haired wearer of
the black velvet cap, nodding and beaming in acknowledgment of the
elaborately respectful salutations of the male visitors and the smiling
bows of the ladies, received from one little British matron a stare so
freezing in its quality that his jaw dropped, and his bright black eyes
became circular with astonishment and dismay.

       *       *       *       *       *

That an old man at whom everybody smiled kindly--an old man who had
little else to live upon or for but love should meet a look so cold....
His underlip drooped like a snubbed child’s. Why was it? Did not the
little English lady know--surely she must know!--how much, how very
much old Hector Dunoisse had done, and given, sacrificed and endured
and suffered, to earn the love and gratitude of women and of men? He
did not wish to boast--but she might have remembered it!... A tear
dropped on the wrinkled ivory hands that lay helplessly upon the rug
that covered the sharp bony knees.

“You have been guilty of a piece of confoundedly bad taste, let me tell
you!” said the irritated Englishman, addressing his still vibrating
wife. “To cut an old man like that! It was brutal!” He added, “And
idiotic into the bargain!”

“I simply couldn’t help it,” said his wife, her stiffened facial
muscles relaxing into the flabbiness that heralds tears. “When I saw
that horrible old creature coming, looking so dreadfully innocent and
kind; and remembered how often I have seen the little French and German
and Swiss children crowding round his chair listening to a story, or
being lifted up to kiss him”--she gulped--“or toddling to his knee
to slip their little bunches of violets into those helpless hands of
his--I could _not_ help it! I simply had to!”

“Then you simply had to commit a social blunder of a very grave
kind,” pronounced her lord, assuming that air of detachment from the
person addressed which creates a painful sense of isolation. “For
permit me to inform you that M. Hector Dunoisse is not a person, but
a Personage--whom the President of the Swiss Confederation and about
half the Crowned Heads of Europe congratulate upon his birthday. And
who--if he had chosen to accept the crown they offered him half a
lifetime back--would have been to-day the ruling Hereditary Prince of
an important Bavarian State. As it is----”

“As it is, he would forgive me the hideous thing I have done,” the
little lady cried, flushing indignant scarlet to the roots of her
hair, “could he know that it was my own husband who deceived me....
Who humbugged me,” she gulped hysterically. “_Spoofed_ me, as our
boy Herbert would hideously say,--with a whole string of ridiculous,
trumped-up stories----” She hurriedly sought for and applied her
handkerchief, and the final syllable was lost in the dolorous blowing
of an injured woman’s nose. Her husband entreated pusillanimously:

“For Heaven’s sake, don’t cry!--at least, here on the Promenade, with
scores of people staring. What I told you is the simple truth....
Don’t Roman Catholics say that the regular rips make the most
thorough-going, out-and-out saints when they _do_ take to religion
and good works and all the rest of it? Besides ... good Lord!--it’s
Ancient History--happened years and years before our parents saw each
other--and the old chap is ninety--or nearly! And--even supposing
Dunoisse did what people say he did, only think what Dunoisse has done!”

Curiosity prevailed over injured dignity. The wounded wife emerged from
behind a damp wad of cambric to ask: “What _has_ he done?”

“What has he ... why--he has received all sorts of Votes of Thanks from
Public Societies, and he has been decorated with heaps of Orders ...
the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, and the Orders of the Annunziata
of Savoy, and the Black Eagle; and he is a Commander of the Legion of
Honor and a Knight of the Papal Order of St. Gregory, and Hereditary
Prince of Widinitz if he liked, but he doesn’t like ... goodness me!
Haven’t I told you all that already?” The M.P. for the North London
borough flapped his hands and lapsed into incoherency.

“But surely you can tell me why these honors were bestowed upon
M. Dunoisse?” asked his wife. “I am waiting for the answer to my
question--what has he done to deserve them?”

The clear, incisive English voice asking the question cut like a knife
through the consonantal, sibilant French, and the guttural be-voweled
German. And a stranger standing near--recognizable as a French priest
of the Catholic Church less by the evidence of his well-worn cloth,
and Roman collar, and wide-brimmed, round-crowned silk beaver, with
the shabby silk band and black enameled buckle, than by a certain
distinctive manner and expression--said upon a sudden impulse,
courteously raising his hat:

“Madame will graciously pardon an old man for presuming to answer a
question not addressed to him. She asks, if I comprehend aright, what
M. Dunoisse has done to deserve the numberless marks of respect and
esteem that have been showered on him?... I will have the honor of
explaining to Madame if Monsieur kindly consents?”

“Pleasure, I’m sure!” babbled the dyspeptic victim of the Suffragists
and the Budget, yawning as only the liverish can. The priest went on,
addressing the little lady:

“Madame, the invalid gentleman whose paralyzed hands rest upon his
knees as inertly and immovably as the hands of some granite statue of
an Egyptian deity, has given with both those helpless hands--gives to
this hour!--will give, when we have long been dust, and these pretty
infants playing round us are old men and aged women--a colossal gift
to suffering Humanity. He has expended wealth, health, all that men
hold dear, in founding, endowing, and organizing a vast international,
undenominational, neutral Society of Mercy, formed of brave and skilled
and noble men and women,--ah!--may Heaven bless those women!--who,
being of all nations, creeds, and politics, are bound by one vow;
united in one purpose; bent to one end--that end the alleviation of the
frightful sufferings of soldiers wounded in War. Madame must have heard
of the Convention of Helvetia?... But see there, Madame!... Observe, by
a strange coincidence--the Symbol in the sky!”

The hand of the speaker, with a graceful, supple gesture of indication,
waved westwards, and the little lady’s eyes, following it, were led
to the upper end of the wide, irregular châlet-bordered Promenade
of Zeiden, where the wheel-chair of the invalid had again come to a
standstill; possibly in obedience to its occupant’s desire to look once
more upon the sunset, whose flaming splendors had all vanished now,
save where against a gleaming background of milky-pale vapor glowed
transverse bars of ardent hue, rich and glowing as pigeon’s blood ruby,
or an Emperor’s ancient Burgundy, or that other crimson liquor that
courses in the veins of Adam’s sons, and was first spilled upon the
shrinking earth by the guilty hand of Cain.

“It is the sign,” the priest repeated earnestly; “the badge of the
great international League of love and pity which owes its institution
to M. Hector Dunoisse.” He added: “The face of Madame tells me that no
further explanation is needed. With other countries that have drunk of
War, and its agonies and horrors, Protestant England renders homage to
the Crimson Cross.”




II


Old Hector Dunoisse could not sleep that night. Sharp pains racked his
worn bones; his paralyzed muscles were as though transfixed by surgical
needles of finely-tempered steel. He would not permit the nurse to sit
up, despite the physician’s orders, therefore the medical Head of the
Institution suffered the patient to have his way. So he lay alone in
the large, light, airy room, furnished with all the appliances that
modern surgical skill can devise for the aid of helplessness, and the
alleviation of suffering, and yet a place of pain....

He would not suffer the nurse to lower the green Venetian blinds of
the high, clear windows that fronted to the south-east and south-west;
the moonbeams could not do him any harm, he declared. On the contrary!
The mild, bright planet shining above the lonely _kulms_ and terrible
crevasses, shedding her radiant light upon the peasant’s Alpine hut and
the shepherd’s hillside cave, as upon the huge hotel-caravanserais,
glittering with windows and crowded with wealthy tourists, and the
stately mediæval castles, ruined and inhabited by owls and bats and
foxes, or lovingly preserved and dwelt in by the descendants of the
great robber knights who reared their Cyclopean towers--was she not his
well-loved friend?

       *       *       *       *       *

So, as one waits for a friend, old Hector lay waiting for the
moonrise; the white-haired, handsome, vivacious old face, with the
bright black eyes, propped high upon the pillow, the wasted, half-dead
body of him barely raising the light warm bed-coverings, the helpless
arms and stiff white hands stretched rigidly along its sides.

       *       *       *       *       *

And not only the man waited; the heavens seemed also waiting. The
ghostly white ice-peaks and snowy mountain-ranges, crowded on the
horizon as though they waited too. Corvus burned bright, low down on
the south horizon; Spica blazed at the maidenly-pure feet of Virgo.
Bootes looked down from the zenith, a pale emerald radiance, dimmed by
the fierce red fires of the Dog Star.... The purple-dark spaces beyond
these splendors were full of the palely glimmering presences of other
stars. But the old man wanted none of these. He had forgotten to look
at the almanac. He began to fear there would be no moon that night.

Old, sick and helpless as he was, this was a great grief to him.
Useless the presence of others when we lack the one we need. And a
little crack in a dam-wall is enough to liberate the pent-up waters;
the thin, bright trickle is soon followed by the roaring turbid flood.
Then, look and see what fetid slime, what ugly writhing creatures bred
of it, the shining placid surface masked and covered.... The purest
women, the noblest men, no less than we who know ourselves inwardly
corrupt and evil, have such depths, where things like these are hidden
from the light of day....

       *       *       *       *       *

The pain was intolerable to-night,--almost too bad to bear without
shrieking. Dunoisse set his old face into an ivory mask of stern
resistance, and his white mustache and arched and still jet-black
eyebrows bristled fiercely, and the cold drops of anguish gathered upon
the sunken purple-veined temples upon which the silky silver hair was
growing sparse and thin. Ouf!... what unutterable relief it would have
been to clench his fists, even!... But the poor hands, helpless as a
wax doll’s or a wooden puppet’s, refused to obey his will.

He lay rigid and silent, but his brain worked with vivid, feverish
activity, and his glance roved restlessly round the white-papered
walls of the airy, cleanly room. Shabby frames containing spotted
daguerreotypes and faded old _cartes-de-visite_ of friends long dead;
some water-color portraits and engravings of battle-scenes, hung there;
with some illuminated addresses, a few more modern photographs, a
glazed case of Orders and Crosses, a cheap carved rack of well-smoked
pipes, and--drawn up against the painted wainscot--an imposing array
of boots of all nationalities, kinds and descriptions, in various
stages of wear. His small library of classics filled a hanging shelf,
while a pair of plain deal bookcases were stuffed with publications in
half-a-dozen European languages, chiefly well-known reference-works
upon Anatomy and Physiology, Surgery and Medicine; whilst a row of
paper-bound, officially-stamped Government publications--one or two
of these from his own painstaking, laborious pen--dealt with the
organization, equipment and sanitation of Military Field Hospitals,
Hospital Ships and Hospital Trains, the clothing, diet and care of
sick and wounded, and, in relation to these, the Laws and Customs of
grim and ghastly War. And a traveling chest of drawers, a bath, and
a portable secretary, battered and ink-stained by half a century of
honorable use; with the scanty stock of antique garments hanging in the
white-pine press; a meager store of fine, exquisitely darned and mended
old-world linen; an assortment of neckties, wonderfully out of date;
some old felt wideawakes, and three black velvet caps, with a camel’s
hair _bournous_, that had served for many years as a dressing-gown; and
the bust of a woman, in marble supported on a slender ebony pedestal
set between the windows, completed the inventory of the worldly
possessions of old Hector Dunoisse.

All that he owned on earth, these few shabby chattels, these dimmed
insignia, with their faded ribbons--this man who had once been greatly
rich, and prodigally generous, subsisted now in his helpless age upon
a small annuity, purchased when he had been awarded the Nobel Prize.
What bitter tears had been wrung from the bright black eyes when he
was compelled to accept this charity! But it had to be; the burden of
his great humanitarian labors had exhausted his last energies and his
remaining funds; and Want had risen up beside his bed of sickness, and
laid upon him, who had cheered away her specter from so many pallets,
her chill and meager hand.

Ah, how he loved the glaring daguerreotypes, the spotty photographs,
the old cheap prints! Far, far more dearly than the Rembrandts and
Raphaels, the Watteaus and the three superb portraits by Velasquez
that he had sold to the Council of the Louvre, and the Austrian
Government and the Trustees of the National Gallery. The cabinets of
rare and antique medals, the collection of Oriental porcelain and
Royal Sèvres that had been bequeathed to him with the immense private
fortune of Luitpold, the long-deceased Prince-Regent of Widinitz,
that had also been disposed of under the hammer to supply his needs
for funds,--always more funds,--had never possessed one-tenth of the
preciousness of these poor trifles. For everything was a memento
or token of something done or borne, given or achieved towards the
fulfillment of the one great end.

The _chibuk_ with the bowl of gilded red clay, the cherry-stick stem
and the fine amber mouthpiece, an officer of the English Guards had
forced upon Dunoisse at Balaklava. The inkstand, a weighty sphere of
metal mounted on three grape-shot, with a detached fourth for the
lid--that was a nine-pound shell from the Sandbag Battery. And the
helmet-plate with a silver-plated Austrian Eagle and the brass device
like a bomb, with a tuft of green metal oak-leaves growing out of the
top, that was a souvenir of the bloody field of Magenta. It had been
pressed upon Dunoisse by a flaxen-haired, blue-eyed Ensign of Austrian
Infantry, whom he had rescued from under a hecatomb of dead men and
horses, still living, but blackened from asphyxia, the colors of his
regiment yet clutched in his cramped and blackened hands.

Even the _bournous_, the voluminous long-sleeved, hooded garment of
gray-white camel’s hair, bordered with delicate embroideries of silver
and orange-red floss silk--that had its touching history; that had been
also the legacy of one who had nothing else to give.

“He was an Arab of pure blood, a pious Moslem, Sergeant-Major in the
First Regiment of Spahis, a chief in his own right. He fell in the
assault upon the Hill of Cypres. Towards the end of the day, when
the sun had set upon Solferino’s field of carnage, and the pale moon
was reflected in the ponds of blood that had accumulated in every
depression of the ravaged ground, we found him, riddled with bullets,
pierced with wounds, leaning with his back against a little tree, his
bleeding Arab stallion standing by him as he prayed in the words of the
Prophet: ‘_Lord, grant me pardon, and join me to the companionship on
high!_...’ He died two nights later upon a heap of bloody straw in the
Church of Santa Rosalia at Castiglione. This had been strapped in the
roll behind his saddle--his young bride had embroidered the gold and
silken ornaments; in the field it had served him as a covering, and
until the dead-cart came to remove the corpse,--as a pall.”

More relics yet. The broken lock of a Garibaldian musket from
Calatifimi. The guard of a Papal soldier’s saber from Castel Fidardo,
brown with Sardinian blood.

More still.... The gilded ornament from the staff-top of a Prussian
Eagle--a souvenir of Liebenau, or was it Hühnerwasser? A Uhlan
lance-head from Hochhausen. An exploded cartridge gathered on the
field of Alcolea, where the Spanish Royalists were beaten in 1868.
And a French _chassepot_ and a Prussian needle-gun, recalling the
grim tragedy of 1870 and the unspeakable disaster of Sedan. While a
fantastically chased cross of Abyssinian gold, and a Bersagliere’s
plume of cocks’ feathers, their glossy dark green marred with dried
blood, were eloquent of the massacre of the Italian troops at Dagoli,
in ’87.

What memories were this old man’s!




III


Old Hector could have told you that such crowded, thronging memories
aggravate the dull, throbbing ache of loneliness to torment. To re-read
letters written in faded ink by beloved hands that lie moldering
under-ground, or are very far removed from us; or to brood upon the
soulless image of a soulful face that, dead or living, we may never see
with our earthly eyes again, does but exquisitely intensify the agony
of loss. We who are old and wise should know better than to seek to
quench the heart’s thirst at such bitter Desert wells. Nevertheless,
our eyes turn to the faded portrait, our hands touch the spring of the
tarnished locket half-a-hundred times a day.

       *       *       *       *       *

Upon the pillow beside the worn white head there invariably lay a
stained and shabby Russia-leather letter-case, white at the edges with
wear. It was fastened by a little lock of dainty mechanism, and the
fine thin chain of bright steel links that was attached to it went
round the old man’s neck. He turned his head that his cheek might rest
against the letter-case, and a slow tear over-brimmed an underlid,
and fell and sparkled on the dull brownish leather that had once been
bright and red. A silver plate, very worn and thin, bore an engraved
date and a brief direction:

                          =BURY THIS WITH ME=

It would be done by-and-by, he knew; for who would rob a dead old man
of his dearest treasure? Moreover, the contents of the leather case
were valueless in ordinary eyes.

Just a package of letters penned in a fine, delicate, pointed,
old-fashioned gentlewoman’s handwriting to the address of M. Hector
Dunoisse in half-a-dozen European capitals, and several cities and
posting-towns of Turkey and Asiatic Russia; their condition ranging
from the yellowed antiquity of more than fifty years back to the
comparative newness of the envelope that bore the London postmark of
the previous 22nd of December, and the Zeiden stamp of three days
later. For once a year, at Christmas-tide, was celebrated old Hector
Dunoisse’s joy-festival--when such a letter came to add its bulk to the
number in the leather case.

He would be fastidiously particular about his toilet upon that day of
days, he who was always so scrupulously neat. His silken white hair
would be arranged after the most becoming fashion, his cheeks and chin
would be shaved to polished marble smoothness, his venerable mustache
waxed with elaborate care. He would be attired in his best white
flannel suit, crowned with his newest velvet cap, and adorned with
all his Orders; while pastilles would be set burning about the room,
fresh flowers would be placed, not only on the tiny altar with its
twinkling waxlights and colored plaster presentment of the Stable at
Bethlehem, but before a photograph in a tortoise-shell-and-silver frame
that always stood upon a little table, beside his chair or bed. About
the ebony pedestal of the marble bust that stood in the shallow bay
of the southeast window a garland would be twined of red-berried holly
and black-berried ivy, and delicately-tinted, sweet-scented hyacinths,
grown under glass.... And then the hands of a nursing Sister or of a
mere hireling would open the letter, and hold the feebly-written sheet
before Dunoisse’s burning eyes, and they would weep as they read, until
their bright black flame was quenched in scalding tears.

Do you laugh at the old lover with his heart of youthful fire, burning
in the body that is all but dead? You will if you who read are young.
Should you be at your full-orbed, splendid prime of womanhood or
manhood, you will smile as you pity. But those who have passed the
meridian of life will sigh; for they are beginning to understand; and
those who are very old will smile and sigh together, and look wise--so
wise! Because they have found out that Love is eternally young.

Oh, foolish Youth!--that deems the divine passion to be a matter of
red lips meeting red lips, bright eyes beaming into bright eyes, young
heart beating against young heart. Intolerant, splendid Prime, that
leaps to the imperious call of passion and revels in the delirious
pleasures of the senses. For you love is the plucking of the ripe,
fragrant, juicy fruit; the rose-tinted foam upon the sparkling wine
that brims the crystal goblet; the crown of rapture; the night of
jeweled stars and burning kisses that crowns the fierce day of Desire.

And ah! wise Age, experienced and deep, where Youth is all untaught,
and Prime but a little more scholar-wise, and Middle Age but a beginner
at the book.... For you Love is the jewel in the matrix of the stone;
the sacred lamp that burns unquenched within the sealed-up sepulcher;
the flame that glows in the heart’s core the more hotly that snows of
years lie on the head, and the icy blood creeps sluggishly through the
clogged arteries; the sustenance and provender and nourishment of Life
no less than the hope that smiles dauntlessly in the face of Death. For
to die is to follow whither she has gone,--to meet with him again. Can
those who seek to disprove the Being of their Creator with the subtle
brain He forged be in the truest sense of the word--lovers? I say No!
For Love is an attribute of the Divine.

Those written sheets in the locked case of dulled crimson leather,
attached to the fine steel chain, told no tale of love....

Ah! the womanly, gracious letters, breathing warm friendship and kindly
interest in the long-unseen, how diligently the old man had tried to
read between their fine clear lines the one thing that he never found
for all his searching. How devoutly they had been kept and cherished,
how delicately and reverently handled.... But for seven long years now
they had lain undisturbed in their receptacle, only seeing light when
it was opened with the little key that hung upon the steel chain, so
that the newest letter of all might be added to the treasured store.

Of late years, how brief they had become! From the three crowded
sheets of more than fifty years back, to the single sheet of ten
years--the quarter-sheet of five years ago--a mere message of kind
remembrance, ending with the beloved name. It had been tragedy to
Dunoisse, this slow, gradual shortening of his allowance of what was
to him the bread of life. He could not understand it. Had he offended
her in some way? He dared to write to her and ask, by aid of the paid
secretary who typed from his painstaking dictation in a language which
she did not understand. And the reply came in the caligraphy of a
stranger. He realized then what he had never before dreamed possible,
that his worshiped lady had grown old.... A photograph accompanied
the letter. He recognized, with a joyful leap of the heart, that the
sweet, placid, aged face with the delicate folds of a fine lace shawl
framing it, was beautiful and gracious still. Thenceforward, in a
tortoiseshell-and-silver frame, it stood upon the little table beside
the bed.

But in another year or two heavy news reached him. She had grown
feeble, barely able to trace with the gently-guided pen the
well-loved initials at the foot of the written page! The shock of
this unlooked-for, appalling revelation made him very ill. He was not
himself for months,--never quite again what he had been.... A day was
coming when ... the letters might come no more. Her initials were so
faintly traced upon the last one that--that----

No, no! God was too kind to let her die before him. He clenched his
toothless gums as he would have liked to clench his paralyzed hands,
and clung desperately to his belief in the Divine Love.




IV


To lie, helpless and lonely and old, and racked by pain, and to keep on
believing in the Divine goodness, requires a caliber of mental strength
proportionately equal to the weakness of the sufferer. But it was too
late in the day for Dunoisse to doubt.

And here was his dear Moon swimming into view, rising from the
translucent depths of a bottomless lagoon of sapphire ether, red Mars
glowing at her pearly knee. A childlike content softened the lines that
pain and bitterness had graven on the old ivory face. He nodded, well
pleased.

“There you are! I see you! You have come as punctually as you always
do, making my pain the easier to bear,” he murmured brokenly to the
planet. “You shine and look at me and understand; unlike men and women
who talk, and talk, and comprehend nothing! And you are old, like my
love; and changeless, like my love; while yet my love, unlike you, is
eternal; it will endure when you have passed away with Time. Dear Moon!
is she looking at you too? Does she ever think of me? But that is a
great question you never answer. I can only lie and wait, and hope and
long ... in vain? Ah, God! If I could but know for certain that it has
not been in vain!...”

Then, with a rush of furious crimson to the drawn cheeks and the
knitted forehead, the barrier of his great and dauntless patience
broke down before his pent-up passion’s flood. His features were
transfigured; the venerable saint became an aged, rebellious Lucifer.
Words crowded from his writhing lips, despair and fury blazed in his
great black eyes.

“How long, O God, implacable in Thy judgments,” he cried, “must I lie
here, a living soul immured in a dead body, and wait, and yearn, and
long? ‘Give thanks,’ say the priests, ‘that you have your Purgatory in
this world.’ Can there be any torture in Purgatory to vie with this I
am enduring? Has Hell worse pains than these? None! for Despair and
Desolation sit on either side of me. I rebel against the appointments
of the Divine Will. I doubt the Love of God.”

Rigor seized him, his racked nerves vibrated like smitten harp-strings,
sweat streamed upon his clammy skin, the beating of his heart shook him
and shook the bed, a crushing weight oppressed his panting lungs.

“It is so long, so very long!--sixteen years that I have lain here,”
he moaned. “I was content at first, or could seem so. ‘Let me but live
while she lives and die when she dies!--’ had always been my prayer. I
pray so still--yes, yes! but the long waiting is so terrible. When I
had health and strength to labor incessantly, unrestingly, then I could
bear my banishment. Through the din and shock of charging squadrons,
the rattle of musketry and the roar of artillery, the ceaseless roll
of the ambulances and the shrieks of mangled men, one cannot hear
the selfish crying of the heart that starves for love. Even in times
of peace there was no pause, no slackening. To organize, administer,
plan, devise, perfect,--what work, what work was always to be done! Now
the work goes on. I lie here. They defer to me, appeal to me, consult
me--oh, yes, they consult me! They are very considerate to the old man
who is now upon the shelf.”

He laughed and the strange sound woke an echo that appalled him. It
sounded so like the crazy laugh of a delirious fever-patient, or of
some poor peasant wretch driven beyond his scanty wits by the horror
and the hideousness of War. He shook with nervous terror now, and
closed his eyes tightly that he might shut out all the familiar things
that had suddenly grown strange.

“Let me die, my God! I cannot bear Life longer!” he said more calmly.
“Let her find me crouching upon the threshold of Paradise like a
faithful hound, when she comes, borne by Thy rejoicing Angels to claim
her glorious reward. I am not as courageous as I boasted myself; the
silence and the emptiness appal me. Let me die!--but what then of my
letter that comes once a year?” he added in alarm. “No, no! I beseech
Thee, do not listen to me, a sinful, rebellious old grumbler. I am
content--or I would be if the time were not so long.”

Something like a cool, light finger seemed as if drawn across his
burning eyelids. He opened them and smiled. For a long broad ray of
pure silvery moonshine, falling through the high southeast window upon
the white marble bust that stood upon the ebony pedestal against its
background of mountain-peaks and sky, reached to the foot of his bed,
and rising higher still, had flowed in impalpable waves of brightness
over the helpless feet, and covered the stiff white hands, and now
reached his face.

This was the moment for which he nightly waited in secret fear, and
breathless expectation and desire. Would the miracle happen, this
night of all the nights? Would it visit him to bless or leave him
uncomforted? He trembled with the desperate eagerness that might defeat
its end.

The moon was full and rode high in the translucent heavens. To the
lonely watcher the celestial orb suggested the likeness of a crystal
Lamp, burning with a light of inconceivable brilliance in a woman’s
white uplifted hand. He knew whose hand. His black eyes softened into
lustrous, dreamy tenderness, a smile of welcome curved about his lips,
as the moon-rays illuminated the marble features of the bust that stood
in the bay.

The face of the bust was the same as the old, beautiful face of the
photographic portrait that stood in its tortoise-shell-and-silver
frame upon the little table by his bed. You saw it as the sculptured
presentment of a woman still young, yet past youth. Slenderly framed,
yet not fragile, the slight shoulders broad, the long rounded throat
a fitting pedestal for the high-domed, exquisitely proportioned head.
Upon her rich, thick waving hair was set a little cap: close-fitting,
sober, with a double-plaited border enclosing the clear, fine, oval
face, a little thin, a shade worn, as by anxiety and watching.

The face--her face!--was not turned towards the bed. It bent a little
aside as though its owner pondered. And that the fruit of such
reflection would be Action, swift, unflinching, prompt, direct--no one
could doubt who observed the purpose in the wide arching brows; the
salient, energetic jut of the rather prominent, slightly-aquiline nose,
with its high-bred, finely-cut nostrils; the severity and sweetness
that sat throned upon the lips; the rounded, decisive chin that
completed the womanly-fair image. A little shawl or cape was pinned
about her shoulders; to the base of the pure column of the throat she
was virginally veiled and covered.

       *       *       *       *       *

And if the chief impression she conveyed was Purity, the dominant note
of her was Reflection. For the eyes beneath the thick white eyelids
were observant; the brain behind the broad brows pondered, reviewed,
decided, planned.... It seemed as though in another moment she must
speak; and the utterance would solve a difficulty; reduce confusion
into sanest order, throw light upon darkness; clear away some barrier;
devise an expedient, formulate a rule....

There was not a line of voluptuous tenderness, not one amorous dimple
wherein Cupid might play at hiding, in all the stern, sweet face. She
thought, and dreamed, and planned. And yet, ...

And yet the full-orbed eyes, gray-blue under their heavy, white,
darkly-lashed eyelids as the waters of her own English Channel, could
melt, could glad, for he had seen!... The sensitive, determined mouth
could quiver into exquisite tenderness. The most cherished memory of
this old man was that it had once kissed him.

Ah! if you are ignorant how the memory of one kiss can tinge and
permeate life, as the single drop of priceless Ghazipur attar could
impart its fragrance to the limpid waters in the huge crystal block
skilled Eastern artificers hollowed out for Nur Mahal to bathe in,--you
are fortunate; for such knowledge is the flower of sorrow, that has
been reared in loneliness and watered with tears. This one red rose
made summer amidst the snows of a nonagenarian’s closing years. He felt
it warm upon his mouth; he heard his own voice across the arid steppes
of Time crying to her passionately:

“Oh, my beloved! when we meet again I shall have deserved so much of
God, that when I ask Him for my wages He will give me even you!”

What had he not done since then, what had he not suffered, how much had
he not sacrificed, to keep this great vow? Had he not earned his wages
full forty years ago? Yet God made no sign, and she had gone her ways
and forgotten.

It was only in pity,--only in recognition of his being, like herself,
the survivor of a vanished generation, almost the only human link
remaining to bind this restless Twentieth Century with the strenuous,
splendid days of the early Victorian era, that she had written to him
once a year.

Only in pity, only in kindness was it, after all?

This one thing is certain, that at rare, irregular intervals, he reaped
the fruit of his long devotion--his unswerving, fanatical fidelity--in
the renewal of that lost, vanished, unforgettable moment of exquisite
joy.

As he sat in his wheeled-chair upon the Promenade of Zeiden, as he lay
upon his bed, he would feel, drawing nearer, nearer, the almost bodily
presence of a Thought that came from afar. A delicate thrilling ecstasy
would penetrate and vivify the paralyzed nerves of his half-dead body,
the blood would course in the frozen veins with the ardent vigor of
his prime. He would see her, his beloved lady, in a halo of pale
moonlight, bending to comfort--descending to bless. Once more he would
kneel before her; yet again he would take the beloved hands in his, and
draw them upwards to his heart. And their lips would meet, and their
looks would mingle, and then.... Oh! then the waking to loneliness, and
silence, and pain.




V


He was prone, when the visitations of her almost tangible Thought of
him were interrupted by periods of unconsoled waiting, to doubt the
actuality of his own experience. That was the worst agony of all, to
which the sharpest physical torments were preferable, when in the long,
dreary, miserable nights a mocking voice would whisper in his reluctant
ear:

“You have been deceived. She never thinks of you. Driveling old dotard!
she has long forgotten that night at Scutari. Why in the name of
Folly do you cling to your absurd conviction that she loved you then,
that she loves you still? You have been deceived, I say. Curse her,
blaspheme God, and die!”

“Be silent, be silent!” Dunoisse would say to the invisible owner of
the mocking, jeering voice. “If I had the use of this dead right hand
to make the sign of the Cross, you would soon be disposed of. For I
know who and what you are, very well!”

And he would clamp his lean jaws sternly together, and look up to the
carved walnut Crucifix with the Emblems of the Passion, that hung upon
the wall beside his bed. And the thin, nagging voice would die away in
a titter, and another Voice would whisper in the innermost shrine of
his deep heart:

“My son, had I the use of My Arms when I hung upon the cross of
Calvary? Yet, nailed thereon beyond the possibility of human movement,
did I not pluck the sting from Death, and rise victorious over the
Grave, and tread down Satan under My wounded Feet? Answer, My little
son?”

And Dunoisse would whisper, falteringly:

“Lord, it is true! But Thou wert the Son of God most High, and I am
only a helpless, suffering, desolate old man, worn out and worthless
and forgotten!”

The Voice would answer:

“Thou art greater than a thousand Kings. Thou art more glorious than
an Archangel, of more value than all the stars that shine in the
firmament--being a man for whom Christ died! Be of good courage. This
trial will not last long. Believe, endure, pray!... Hast thou forgotten
thy compact with Me?”

Dunoisse would cry out of the depths with a rending sob:

“No! but it is a sin of presumption to seek to make bargains with God.
The compact was impious.”

The Voice would say:

“Perhaps, yet thou didst make it: and thou hast kept it. Shall I be
less faithful than thou?”

Dunoisse would falter:

“I should have loved Thee for Thyself above any creature Thou hast
made. To serve Thee for the love of even a perfect woman, was not this
wrong?”

“It may be so!” the Voice would answer, “and therefore I have visited
thee with My rods and scourgings. Yet, if I choose woman for My Means
of Grace, what is that to thee?”

Dunoisse would not be able to answer for weeping. The Voice would
continue:

“Moreover, it may be that in loving this woman, My servant, thou hast
loved Me. For she is pure, and I am the Fountain of Purity; she is
charitable, and I am Charity itself. She is beautiful of soul, beloved
and loving, and I am unspeakable Beauty, and boundless, measureless
Love. Be courageous, little son of Mine! Believe, and hope, and
pray!...”

Dunoisse would stammer with quivering lips:

“I believe!... I hope!... Lord, grant me strength to go on believing
and hoping!”

Then he would fall peacefully asleep upon a pillow wet with tears. Or
he would lie awake and let his memory range over the prairies of dead
years that stretched away so far behind....

       *       *       *       *       *

Will you hear some of the things that this old man remembered? Listen,
then, if it be only for an hour. That is a little space of time, you
say, and truly. Yet I gave my youth and most of the things that men and
women cherish, to buy this hour, dear, unknown friend!--of you.




VI


At sixteen years of age Hector-Marie-Aymont-von Widinitz Dunoisse
fought his first duel, with a fellow-student of the Royal School of
Technical Military Instruction, Rue de la Vallée Ste. Gabrielle.

The quarrel occurred after one of the weekly inspections by the
General-Commandant, when Hector, accoutered with the black shiny
sword-belt and cartridge-belt; armed with the sword, bayonet, and the
heavy little brass-mounted, muzzle-loading musket, commonly displayed,
when not in use, with two hundred and ninety-nine similar weapons in
the long gallery running above the class-rooms--when Hector with his
fellow-pupils of the First Division had performed a series of military
evolutions in the presence of Miss Harriet Smithwick, admitted with
other persons standing in the parental and protective relation to
the young neophytes of the School, to the dusty patch of tree-shaded
grass at the lower end of the smaller exercise-ground, where Messieurs
the hundred-and-fifty pupils of the two companies of the Junior
Corps--the great boys of the Senior possessing a parade-ground to
themselves--commonly mustered for drill.

On other days, visitors and friends were received in a small
entrance-yard, dank and moist in wet weather, baking and gritty in hot;
inhospitable and uninviting at all times; in which enclosure M. and
Madame Cornu were permitted by the authorities to purvey fruit and
sweets, and a greasy kind of _galette_, with ices of dubious complexion
in June and July; and syrups of _groseille_ and _grenadine_, served
hot--and rendered, if possible, even stickier and more vapidly cloying
beverages by being thus served,--in the bitter winter months.

The good Smithwick would have enjoyed herself better if permitted to
ascend to the department on the floor above the Infirmary, where Madame
Gaubert presided, in an atmosphere strongly flavored with soft-soap,
over long rows of shelves divided into regulation pigeon-holes,
containing within an officially-appointed space of one foot ten inches
square the linen of young Hector and his companions. It would have
satisfied a burning curiosity from which the poor little lady had long
suffered, had she been permitted to observe for herself the process of
lavation that deprived her ex-pupil’s shirts of every button, while
leaving the dirt untouched; and to gauge with her own eyes the holes
of the rats and mice that ate such prodigious mouthfuls, not only in
the garments named, but in the sheets and bolster-covers, towels and
napkins, which, by the amiable dispensation of a paternal Government,
the boy was permitted to bring from home.

Instead, the poor fluttered spinster occupied a small share of one of
the green benches set beneath the shade of the semicircle of lime-trees
at the lower end of the exercise-ground; her neighbors on the right and
left being the venerable Duchesse de Moulny of the Faubourg St-Honoré
and Mademoiselle Pasbas of the Grand Opera Ballet. Pédelaborde,
inventor of an Elixir for the preservation of the teeth to extreme
old age, who in fact enjoyed a Government contract for attending to
the dental requirements of the young gentlemen of the School, weighed
down the bench at its farther end; and M. Bougon, principal physician
of the body to His Majesty King Louis-Philippe, balanced his meager
and wizened anatomy upon the other extremity. Nor was there the lack
of sympathy between the occupants of the bench that might have been
expected. The Duchesse had a grandson--Bougon a son--Pédelaborde a
nephew--the opera-dancer a young _protégé_ (in whom, for the sake of
an early friend, an officer of Cuirassiers, Mademoiselle took a tender
interest)--little Miss Smithwick the adored offspring of a revered
employer, to observe blandly, and discreetly manifest interest in,
and secretly throb and glow and tremble for; so simple and common and
ordinary is Nature beneath all the mass of pretenses we pile upon her,
so homespun are the cords of love, and sympathy, and interest, that
move the human heart.

When the General-Commandant--for this was an ordinary informal
inspection of young gentlemen in the School undress of belted blouse
and brass-badged, numbered _képi_, not the terrific bi-monthly review
_en grande tenue_ of the entire strength of the establishment, when
General, Colonel, Captains, Adjutants, the four Sergeants-Major, the
six drummers, and all the pupils of the Junior and Senior Corps,
wearing the little cocked hat with the white plume and gold lace
trimming; the black leather stock, the blue frocked coat faced with
red, trimmed and adorned with gilt buttons and gold braid, must
pass under the awful eye of a Field-Marshal, assisted by a Colonel
of the Staff, a Major of Artillery, and a fearful array of Civil
Professors--when the General, addressing Alai-Joseph-Henri-Jules de
Moulny, briefly remarked:

“Pupil No. 127, you have the neck of a pig and the finger-nails of a
gorilla! Another offense against that cleanliness which should adorn
the person of a Soldier of France, and the _galon_ of Corporal, which
you disgrace, will be transferred to the sleeve of one more worthy to
wear it.”

You beheld the immense bonnet of the venerable aristocrat, its
great circular sweep of frontage filled with quillings of costly
lace and chastely tinted cambric blossoms, its crown adorned with
nodding plumes, awful as those upon the helmet of the Statue of the
Commendatore, condescendingly bending towards the flamboyant headgear
of the Pasbas--as the Duchesse begged to be informed, her lamentable
infirmity of deafness depriving her of the happiness of hearing the
commendations bestowed by his Chief upon her young relative,--what
Monsieur the General had actually said?

       *       *       *       *       *

“I myself, Madame, failed to catch the expression of approval actually
employed. But,” explained Mademoiselle Pasbas, as she lowered her
_lorgnette_ and turned a candid look of angelic sweetness upon the
dignified old lady, “Madame may rely upon it that they were thoroughly
merited by the young gentleman upon whom they were bestowed.”

“I thank you, Mademoiselle.” The bonnet of the Duchesse bent in
gracious acknowledgment. “It is incumbent upon the members of my family
to set an example. Nor do we fail of our duty, as a rule.”

Perhaps the roguish dimples of Mademoiselle Pasbas were a trifle more
in evidence; possibly the humorous creases of enjoyment deepened in the
stout Pédelaborde’s triple chin; it may be that the sardonic twinkle
behind the narrow gold-rimmed spectacles of M. Bougon took on extra
significance; but all three were as demure as pussycats, not even
exchanging a glance behind the overwhelming patrician headgear with
the stupendous feathers;--to see one another over it would have been
impossible without standing on the bench. This is the simple truth,
without a particle of exaggeration. My Aunt Julietta at this date
purchased from a fashionable milliner in the West End of London----But
my Aunt Julietta has no business on the Calais side of the English
Channel!--let her and her bonnets wait!

The General’s salute closed the review. The pupils presented arms,
a superb effect of a hundred and fifty muskets, not infrequently
thrilling parents to the bestowal of five-franc pieces; the six
drummers beat the disperse as one overgrown hobbledehoy; the orderly
ranks broke up. Discipline gave place to disorder. Boys ran, chasing
one another and yelling, boys skylarked, punching and wrestling, boys
argued in gesticulatory groups, or whispered in knots of two or three
together.... The spectators on the painted benches behind the railing
had risen. Now they filed out by a door in the high-spiked wall behind
the dusty lime-trees, in whose yellow-green blossoms the brown bees
had been humming and droning all through the hot, bright day of June.
The bees were also dusty, and the spectators were liberally powdered
with dust, for the clumping, wooden-heeled, iron toe-capped School
regulation shoes of the young gentlemen had raised clouds which would
have done credit to the evolutions of a battery of horse. And the
yearning desires of Hector Dunoisse were turning in the direction
of a cooling draught of Madame Cornu’s _grenadine_, or of the thin,
vinegary, red ration-wine; when to him says Alain-Joseph-Henri-Jules
de Moulny:

“Tell me, Redskin, didst thou twig my respected grand-mamma perched
in the front row between a variegated she-cockatoo and a molting old
female fowl, who held her head on one side, and cried into a clean
starched pocket-hand-kerchief?”

“She did not cry!” warmly contradicted the young gentleman thus
assailed. “It is her cold-in-the-head that never gets well until she
goes back to England for her holiday once a year; and then she has
_migraine_ instead. All the Smithwick family are like that, Miss
Smithwick says; it is an inherited delicacy of the constitution.”

“‘Smizzique ... Mees Smeezveek.’ ... There’s a name to go to bed
with!...” pursued de Moulny, his thick lips, that were nearly always
chapped, curling back and upwards in his good-natured schoolboy’s grin.
“And how old is she?--your Sm----. I cannot say it again!... And why
does she wear a bonnet that was raked off the top of an ash-barrel, and
a shawl that came off a hook at the Morgue?”

       *       *       *       *       *

Young Hector had been conscious of the antiquated silk bonnet, in hue
the faded maroon of pickling-cabbage, sadly bent as to its supporting
framework of stiffened gauze and whalebone, by the repeated tumbles
of the bonnet-box containing it off the high top-corner of the walnut
wardrobe in Miss Smithwick’s fourth-floor sleeping-apartment at home
in the Rue de la Chaussée-d’Antin. It had been eating into him like a
blister all through the General’s inspection, that venerable wintry
headgear, with its limp veil like a sooty cellar-cobweb, depending
from its lopsided rim. To say nothing of the shawl, a venerable yellow
cashmere atrocity, with long straggling white fringes, missing here and
there, where the tooth of Time had nibbled them away. But though these
articles of apparel made good Smithwick’s ex-pupil feel sick and hot
with shame, they were not to be held up to ridicule. That was perfectly
clear....

Hector could not have told you why the thing was so clear; even as
he thrust a challenging elbow into the big de Moulny’s fleshy ribs,
turning pale under the red Egyptian granite tint of skin that had
earned him his nickname from these boys, his comrades--who like other
boys all the world over, had recently fallen under Fenimore Cooper’s
spell--and said, with a dangerous glitter in his black-diamond eyes:

“I do not know how old she is--it is not possible for a gentleman to
ask a lady her age. But she is a lady!” he added, neatly intercepting
the contradiction before it could be uttered. “_Une femme de bon
ton, une femme comme il faut._ Also she dresses as a lady should ...
appropriately, gracefully, elegantly....” He added grandiloquently,
tapping the brass hilt of his little School hanger: “I will teach you
with this, M. de Moulny, to admire that bonnet and that shawl!”

“_Nom d’un petit bonhomme!_” spluttered the astonished de Moulny. But
there was no relenting in Hector’s hard young face, though he was
secretly sick at the pit of his stomach and cold at heart.

“I will fight you!” he repeated.

De Moulny, always slow to wrath, began to lose his temper. The
outspoken compliments of Monsieur the General had stung, and here was
a more insufferable smart. Also, it was a bosom friend who challenged.
One may be angry with an enemy; it is the friend become foe who drives
us to frenzied rage.

He said, pouting his fleshy lips, sticking out his obstinate chin,
staring at the changed unfriendly face, with eyes grown hard as blue
stones:

“I do not know that I can oblige you by giving you the opportunity of
learning how quickly boasters are cured of brag. For one thing, I have
my stripe,” he added, holding up his head and looking arrogantly down
his nose.

“Since yesterday,” agreed Hector, pointedly. “And after to-day you will
not have it. The squad-paper will hang beside another fellow’s bed,--M.
the Commandant will have reduced you to the ranks for uncleanliness on
parade. So we will fight to-morrow.”

“Possibly!” acquiesced de Moulny, his heavy cheeks quivering with
anger, his thick hands opening and shutting over the tucked-in thumbs.
“Possibly!” he repeated. His sluggish temperament once fairly set
alight, burned with the fierce roaring flame and the incandescent heat
of a fire of cocoanut-shell. And it was in his power to be so well
revenged! He went on, speaking through his nose:

“As it is only since yesterday that you became legitimately entitled
to carry the name you bear, you may be admitted to know something
of what happened yesterday.” He added: “But of what will happen
to-morrow, do not make too sure, for I may decline to do you the honor
of correcting you. It is possible, that!” he added, as Hector stared
at him aghast. “A gentleman may be a bastard--I have no objection to a
bar-sinister.... But you are not only your father’s son--you are also
your mother’s! We de Moulnys are ultra-Catholic----” This was excellent
from Alain-Joseph-Henri-Jules, whose chaplet of beads lay rolling in
the dust at the bottom of the kitlocker at his bed-foot, and who was
scourged to Communion by the family Chaplain at Christmas and Easter,
and at the Fête-Dieu. “Ultra-Catholic. And your mother was a Carmelite
nun!”

“My mother assumed the Veil of Profession when I was eight years old.
With my father’s consent and the approval of her Director,” said
Hector, narrowing his eyelids and speaking between his small white
teeth. “Therefore I may be pardoned for saying that the permission of
the family of de Moulny was not indispensable, or required.”

Retorted de Moulny--and it was strange how the rough, uncultured
intonations, the slipshod grammar, the slang of the exercise-yard and
the schoolroom, had been instinctively replaced in the mouths of these
boys by the phraseology of the outer world of men:

“You are accurate, M. Hector Dunoisse, in saying that your mother was
received into the Carmel when you were eight years old. What you do not
admit, or do not know, is that she was a professed Carmelite when you
were born.” He added, with a pout of disgust: “It is an infamy, a thing
like that!”

“The infamy is yours who slander her!” cried out Hector in the
quavering staccato squeak of fury. “You lie!--do you hear?--You lie!”
And struck de Moulny in the face.




VII


Followed upon the blow a sputtering oath from de Moulny, succeeded
by a buzzing as of swarming hornets, as the various groups scattered
over the exercise-ground broke up and consolidated into a crowd.
Hector and de Moulny, as the nucleus of the said crowd, were deafened
by interrogations, suffocated by the smell of red and blue dye,
perspiration and pomatum, choked by the dense dust kicked up by
thick, wooden-heeled, iron toe-capped shoes (each pupil blacked his
own, not neglecting the soles--at cockcrow every morning)--jostled,
squeezed, hustled and mobbed by immature personalities destined to
be potential by-and-by in the remolding of a New France,--the said
personalities being contained in baggy red breeches and coarse blue,
black-belted blouses. All the eyes belonging to all the faces under
the high-crowned, shiny-peaked caps of undress-wear, faces thin,
faces fleshy, faces pimply, faces high-colored or pale--were round
and staring with curiosity. The Redskin had challenged de Moulny! But
de Moulny was his superior officer! The quarrel was about a woman.
Sacred name of a pipe! Where was the affair to come off? In the Salle
de Danse?--empty save at the State-appointed periods of agility
occurring on two days in the week. In the yard behind the Department of
Chemistry? That was a good place!

Meanwhile a duologue took place between the challenged and the
challenger, unheard in the general hubbub. Said de Moulny, blotchily
pale excepting for the crimson patch upon one well-padded cheekbone,
for his madness was dying out in him, and he was beginning to realize
the thing that he had done:

“What I have said is true: upon my honor! I heard it from my father.
Or, to be more correct, I heard my father tell the story to M.
de Beyras, the Minister of Finance, and General d’Arville at the
dinner-table only last night.” He added: “My grandmother and the other
ladies had withdrawn. I had dined with them--it being Wednesday.
Perhaps they forgot me, or thought I was too deep in the dessert to
care what they said. But if my mouth was stuffed with strawberries and
cream, and peaches and bonbons, my ears were empty, and I heard all I
wanted to hear.”

The crowd was listening now with all its ears. That image of de Moulny
gormandizing tickled its sense of fun. There was a general giggle, and
the corners of the mouths went up as though pulled by one string. De
Moulny, sickening more and more at his task of explanation, went on,
fumbling at his belt:

“As to remembering, that is very easy. Read me a page of a book, or a
column of a newspaper twice--I will recite it you without an error,
as you are very well aware. I will repeat you this that I heard in
private, if you prefer it?”

Hector, between his small square teeth, said--the opposite of what he
longed to say.... “There can be no privacy in a place like this. I
prefer that you should speak out, openly, before all here!”

There was a silence about the boys, broken only by a horse-laugh or
two, a whinnying giggle. The piled-up faces all about, save one or two,
were grave and attentive, the hands, clean or dirty, generally dirty,
by which the listeners upon the outer circle of the interested crowd
supported themselves upon the shoulders of those who stood in front of
them, unconsciously tightened their grip as de Moulny went on, slowly
and laboriously, as though repeating an imposition, while the red mark
upon his cheek deepened to blackish blue:

“How Marshal Dunoisse originally prevailed upon Sister Térèse de Saint
François, of the Carmelite Convent of Widinitz in Southern Bavaria,
to break her vows for him, I have no idea. I am only repeating what I
have heard, and I did not hear that. He went through a kind of ceremony
with her before a Protestant pastor in Switzerland; and three years
subsequently to the birth of their son, induced a French Catholic
priest, ignorant, of course, that the lady was a Religious,--to
administer the Sacrament of Marriage.” De Moulny stopped to lick his
dry lips, and pursued: “By that ceremony you were made legitimate,
_per subsequens matrimonium_, according to Canon Law.” He syllabled
the Latin as conscientiously as a sacristan’s parrot might have done.
“There is no doubt of the truth of all this; my father said it to M.
de Beyras and the General, and what my father says _is_ so--he never
speaks without being sure!”

Hector knew a pang of envy of this boy who owned a father capable of
inspiring a confidence so immense. But he never took his eyes from
those slowly moving lips of de Moulny’s, as the words came dropping
out....

“Having made Madame his wife, and legitimatized her son by the
marriage, Monsieur the Marshal instituted legal proceedings to recover
the dowry paid by Madame’s father, the Hereditary Prince of Widinitz,
to the Mother Prioress of the Carmelite Convent when his daughter
took the Veil. Monsieur the Marshal did not think it necessary to
tell Madame what he was doing.... Her determination some years later,
to resume the habit of the Carmelite Order--provided the Church she
had outraged would receive her--was violently opposed by him. But
eventually”--de Moulny’s eyes flickered between their thick eyelids,
and he licked his lips again as though Hector’s hot stare scorched
them--“eventually he permitted it to be clearly understood; he stated
in terms, the plainness of which there was no mistaking, that, if
the Church would repay the dowry of the Princess Marie Bathilde von
Widinitz to the husband of Madame Dunoisse, Sœur Térèse de Saint
François might return to the Carmel whenever she felt disposed.”

Hector was sick at the pit of his stomach with loathing of the picture
of a father evoked. He blinked his stiff eyelids, clenched and
unclenched his hot hands, opened and shut his mouth without bringing
any words out of it. The Catholics among the listeners understood why
very well. The Freethinkers yawned or smiled, the Atheists sneered or
tittered, the Protestants wondered what all the rumpus was about? And
de Moulny went on:

“Here M. de Beyras broke in. He said: ‘The Swiss innkeeper spoke
there!’ I do not know what he meant by that. The General answered,
sniffing the bouquet of the Burgundy in his glass: ‘Rather than the
Brigand of the Grand Army!’ Of course, I understood that allusion
perfectly well!”

The prolonged effort of memory had taxed de Moulny. He puffed. Hector
made yet another effort, and got out in a strangling croak:

“The--the dowry. He did not succeed in----?”

De Moulny wrinkled his nose as though a nasty smell had offended the
organ.

“Unfortunately he did, although the money had been expended by the
Prioress in clearing off a building-debt and endowing a House of Mercy
for the incurable sick poor. I do not know how the Prioress managed to
repay it. Probably some wealthy Catholic nobleman came to her aid. But
what I do know is that the reply of the Reverend Mother to Monsieur
the Marshal, conveyed to him through Madame Dunoisse’s Director, ran
like this: ‘_We concede to you this money, the price of a soul. Sister
Térèse de Saint François will return to the Convent forthwith._’”

Hector groaned.

“It was a great sum, this dowry?”

“My father says,” answered de Moulny, “the amount in silver thalers
of Germany, comes to one million, one hundred-and-twenty-five
thousand of our francs. That will be forty-five thousand of your
English sovereigns,” he added with a side-thrust at Hector’s weakness
of claiming, on the strength of a bare month’s holiday spent in
the foggy island, an authoritative acquaintance with its coinage,
customs, scenery, people and vernacular. “The money,” he went on, “was
bequeathed to the Princess Marie Bathilde von Widinitz by her mother,
whose dowry it had been. My father did not say so; possibly that may
not be true.”

Hector’s brows knitted. He mumbled, between burning anger and cold
disgust:

“What can _he_ have wanted with all that money? He had enough before!”

“Some men never have enough,” said de Moulny, in his cold, heavy,
contemptuous way. “What did he want it for? Perhaps to gamble away on
the green cloth or on the Bourse! Perhaps to spend upon his mistresses!
Perhaps to make provision for you....”

“I will not have it!” snarled Hector.

“Nor would I in your place,” said de Moulny with one of his slow nods.
“I like money well enough, but money with that taint upon it!... Robbed
from the dying poor, to--bah!” He spat upon the trodden dust. “Now have
you heard enough?” He added with an inflection that plucked at Hector’s
heartstrings: “It did not give me pleasure listening to the story, I
assure you.”

Hector said:

“Thank you!”

The utterance was like a sob. De Moulny jumped at the sound, looked
about him at the staring faces, back at the face of the boy who had
been his friend, and to whom he had done an injury that could never be
undone, and cried out wildly:

“Why did you challenge me just now for a _gaffe_--a mere piece of
stupid joking--about the bonnet of an old woman who snivels in a
pocket-handkerchief? Do you not know that when once I get angry I am
as mad as all Bicêtre? I swear to you that when I listened to that
story it was with the determination never to repeat it!--to bury
it!--to compel myself to forget it! Yet in a few hours....” He choked
and boggled, and the shamed blood that dyed his solid, ordinarily
dough-colored countenance, obliterated that deepening bruise upon the
cheekbone. “I apologize!” he at last managed to get out. “I have been
guilty of an unpardonable meanness! I ask you, before all here, to
forget it! I beg you to forgive me!”

Hector said, in pain for the pain that was written in de Moulny’s face:

“De Moulny, I shall willingly accept your apology--after we have
fought. You must understand that the lady of whose bonnet you spoke
offensively is my old English governess, once my mother’s _dame de
compagnie_.... If she dried her eyes when she looked at me it must have
been because she was thinking of my mother, whom she loved; and--I
must have satisfaction for your contempt of those tears.... And--you
have refused to fight me because of my birth, you have told me of my
mother’s sin, and of the sacrilege committed by my father. Do you not
understand that this duel must take place? There can be no one who
thinks otherwise here?”

Hector looked about him. There was a sudden buzz from the crowd that
said “No one!”

De Moulny said, with his eyes upon the ground: “I understand that I
have been a brute and a savage. The meeting shall be where you please.
I name my cousin Albert de Moulny for my second, unless he is ashamed
to appear for one who has disgraced his name?”

It was so terrible, the bumptious, arrogant de Moulny’s self-abasement,
that Hector turned his eyes elsewhere, and even the most callous among
the gazers winced at the sight. Albert de Moulny, red and lowering,
butted his way to the side of his principal, savagely kicking the shins
of those boys who would not move. Hector, catching the alert eye of
Pédelaborde, a fat, vivacious, brown-skinned, button-eyed youth who had
the School Code of Honor at his stumpy finger-ends, and was known as
the best fencer of the Junior Corps, gave him a beckoning nod.

“_Sapristi!_” panted the nephew of the man of teeth, as he emerged,
smiling but rather squeezed, from the press of bodies, “so you are
going to give the fat one rhubarb for senna? Ten times I thought you on
the point of falling into each other’s arms! I held on to my ears from
pure fright!--there has not been an affair of honor amongst the Juniors
for three months; we were getting moldy! By-the-way, which of us is to
prig the skewers from the Fencing Theater? De Moulny Younger or me? I
suggest we toss up. As for de Moulny Elder--he is a bad swordsman--you
are better than decent! I say so!... It rests with you to cut his
claws and his tail. He is stronger than you.... _Saperlipopette!_
he has the arms of a blacksmith, but there are certain ruses to be
employed in such a case--I said ruses, not tricks!--to gain time and
tire a long-winded opponent. For example--_saisissez-vous_--you could
stamp upon one of your opponent’s feet during a _corps à corps_, thus
creating a diversion----”

“I am no blackguard ... whatever else I may be!” said his principal
sulkily.

“--Or if you felt in need of a rest,” pursued the enthusiast
Pédelaborde, “you could catch your point against the edge of
de Moulny’s guard, so as to bend it. Then a halt is called for
straightening the steel, and meanwhile--you get your second wind. It
is very simple! Or--you could permit your sword to fall when his blade
beats yours.... De Moulny would never do a thing like that, you say?
not so dishonorable! _Oh! que si!_ And I said these devices might
be practiced in ease of need--not that they were in good form. For
example! You _could_, if he lunges--and de Moulny’s lunge is a nasty
thing!--you could slip and overbalance. Fall to the ground, I mean,
point up, so that he gets hit in that big belly of his. It’s an Italian
mountebank-trick, I don’t recommend it, French fencing keeps to the
high lines. But--_tiens, mon œil!_--to skewer him like a cockchafer,
that would be a lark!”

“Your idea of a lark makes me sick!” broke out Hector, so savagely that
Pédelaborde’s jaw dropped and his eyebrows shot towards his hair. Then:

“Messieurs The Pupils! RETURN TO YOUR STUDIES!” bellowed the most
bull-voiced of the three Sergeants of the Line, appointed to assist
the Captain-Commandant in the drilling and disciplining of the young
gentlemen of the Junior Corps.

The deafening gallop of three hundred regulation shoes followed as
Messieurs the Pupils surged across the parade-ground, mobbed a moment
at the wide pillared entrance to the Hall of the Class-Rooms, then
foamed, a roaring torrent of boyhood, up the iron-shod staircase into
the gallery where the accouterments were racked, the brass-mounted
muskets piled with a clattering that woke the echoes in every
stone-flagged passage and every high-ceilinged room of the big, raw,
draughty building.

Hector had prophesied correctly. Before evening roll-call a further,
deliberate, purposefully-flagrant breach of propriety on the part of
de Moulny had caused him to be relieved of the responsibilities, with
the _galon_ of Corporal. The duel was fought before _reveille_ of the
following day.

Perhaps half-a-dozen cadets were present beside the principals and
their seconds. Deft Pédelaborde had purloined a pair of foils from
one of the wall-cases of the School of Fence. The combat took place
according to the most approved conditions of etiquette, at the rear of
the Department of Chemistry, whose thick-walled, high-windowed rows of
laboratories harbored no possible observers at that hour. Everybody
wore an expression of solemnity worthy of the occasion.... Pédelaborde
was on his best behavior. As he himself said afterwards, “As good as
bread.”

The buttons were ceremoniously broken off the foils. The opponents,
stripped to their drawers, were placed: ... Hector looked at the big
fleshy white body of de Moulny, the deep chest and barreled ribs
heaving gently with the even breathing, and a shudder went through him.
He was remembering something that Pédelaborde had said. And his blade,
when measured against that of his antagonist, shook so that Pédelaborde
could barely restrain a whistle of dismay.

“My man has got the _venette_!” he thought, as de Moulny Younger gave
the word, and the duelists threw themselves on guard. Yet palpably
the advantage was with his man. If not like Hamlet, fat and scant of
breath, de Moulny Elder was too much addicted to the consumption of
pastry, sweets, and fruit to be in hard condition. The contrast between
his sallow impassive bulk, its blonde whiteness intensified by the
vivid green of a vine whose foliage richly clothed the wall that was
his background, and the lithe slimness of Dunoisse, the slender boyish
framework of bone covered with tough young muscle and lean flesh, the
unblemished skin colored like the red Egyptian granite, was curious to
see.

A cat glared and humped and spat upon the wall behind de Moulny,
brandishing a hugely-magnificent tail. Another cat growled and cursed
hideously, below upon the grass-fringed flagstones. The rankness of
their hate tainted the cool clean air. De Moulny, who loathed vile
smells, and was qualmishly sensible of his empty stomach, sniffed
and grimaced.... And a pale rose-and-golden sunrise illuminated
the lower edges of long fleets of pearl-white, pearl-gray-mottled
clouds, traveling north-westwards at the bidding of the morning
breeze. The square tower of St. Étienne and the magnificent towering
dome-crowned dome of the Pantheon beyond, shone out in vivid delicate
aquarelle-tints of slate-blue and olive-green, of umber and warm
brown.... The squat laboratory annexe, bristling with furnace-shafts,
that made one side of the oblong, walled enclosure where the boys
had met to fight; the big barrack-like buildings of the School, were
touched to a certain beauty by the exquisite pure light, the clear
freshness of the new day. And as the sparrows of Paris began to chirp
and flutter, her cocks to crow, her pigeons to preen and coo-coo, and
her milk-carts to clatter over her historic paving-stones--not yet
replaced by the invention of Macadam--the horrible thing befell.

You cannot fence even with the buttoned foil, either for play or
practice, without being conscious that the primitive murderer has
his part in you. These boys, coming to the encounter half-heartedly,
yielded ere long to the fascination of the deadliest game of all. The
strangeness of the unmasked face, and the bare body opposed to the
point, wore off. Hector and de Moulny, at first secretly conscious of
their immaturity, painfully anxious to comport themselves with dignity
and coolness in the eyes of their fellows, mentally clinging with
desperation to evasive Rules, forgot their inexperience, and rose above
their youth, in the heat and strength and fury of that lust to slay....
And by-and-by de Moulny had a jagged bleeding scratch upon the forearm,
and Hector a trickling scarlet prick above the collar-bone, and now
they fought in earnest, as Man and other predatory animals will, each
having tasted the other’s blood.

De Moulny’s wide, heavy parry, carried out time after time with the
same stiff, sweeping pump-handle movement of the arm, had warded off
the other’s sudden savage attack in quinte. He disengaged, dallied
in a clumsy feint, made a blundering opening, delivered one of his
famous long-armed lunges. Hector, in act to riposte, trod upon a slug
in the act of promenading over the dew-wet flagstones, reducing the
land-mollusc of the rudimentary shell to a mere streak of sliminess;
slipped on the streak, made an effort to recover his balance, and fell,
in the seated position sacred to the Clown in the knockabout scenes of
a Pantomime, but with the right wrist at the wrong angle for the ducal
house of de Moulny.

Your schoolboy is invariably entertained by the mishap of the
sitter-down without premeditation. At Hector’s farcical slide and bump
the spectators roared; the seconds grinned despite their official
gravity. De Moulny laughed too, they said afterwards; even as the
broken point of the foil pierced the abdominal bulge above the
tightly-tied silk handkerchief that held up his thin, woolen drawers.
A moment he hesitated, his heavy features flushing to crimson; then
he said, with a queer kind of hiccough, staring down into Hector’s
horrified eyes:

“That spoils my breakfast!”

And with the scarlet flush dying out in livid deadly paleness, de
Moulny collapsed and fell forwards on the blade of the sword.




VIII


The Penal Department of the Royal School of Technical Military
Instruction, so soon to become an institution where the youth of the
nation were taught to fight for Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity under
the banner of the Second Republic of France,--the Penal Department was
a central passage in the basement of the Instructors’ Building, with an
iron-grated gate at either end, and a row of seven cool stone cells on
either side, apartments favorable to salutary reflection, containing
within a space of ten square feet a stool, and a window boarded to the
upper panes.

In one of these Pupil 130, guilty of an offense of homicidal violence
against the person of a schoolfellow, was subjected to cold storage,
pending the Military Court Martial of Inquiry which would follow the
sentence pronounced by the Civil Director-in-Chief of Studies. Pending
both, the offender, deprived of his brass-handled hanger and the esteem
of his instructors, nourished upon bread and water--Seine water in
those unenlightened days, and Seine water but grudgingly dashed with
the thin red vinegary ration-wine--had nothing to do but sit astraddle
on the three-legged stool, gripping the wooden edge between his thighs,
and remember--and remember....

And see, painted on the semi-obscurity of the dimly-lighted cell,
de Moulny’s plume of drab-colored fair hair crowning the high,
knobbed, reflective forehead; the stony-blue eyes looking watchfully,
intolerantly, from their narrow eye-orbits; the heavy blockish nose;
the pouting underlip; the long, obstinate, projecting chin; the ugly,
powerful, attractive young face moving watchfully from side to side on
the column of the muscular neck, in the hollow at the base of which
the first light curly hairs began to grow and mass together, spreading
downwards over the broad chest and fleshy pectorals in a luxuriance
envied by other boys, for to them hirsuteness meant strength, and to be
strong, for a man, meant everything....

He would hear de Moulny grunt as he lunged. He would straighten his
own arm for the riposte--tread on that thrice-accursed slug: feel the
thing squelch under his foot and slip: land in the ridiculous sitting
posture, bump! upon those inhospitable paving-stones, shaken, inclined
to laugh, but horribly conscious that the point of the foil he still
mechanically gripped had entered human flesh....

That bulge of the big sallow body over the edge of the tightly-tied
white silk handkerchief! Just there the steel had entered.... There was
a little trickle of the dark red blood....

“That spoils my breakfast,” he would hear de Moulny say.... He would
see him leaning forward with the forlorn schoolboy grin fixed upon
his scarlet face.... And then--there would be the facial change, from
painful red to ghastly bluish-yellow, and the limp heavy body would
descend upon him, a crushing, overwhelming weight. The foil had broken
under it.... Oh, God! And de Moulny would die.... And he, Hector
Dunoisse, his friend, who loved him, as Jonathan, David, would be his
murderer....

He leaped up in frenzy, oversetting the stool.... Came podgy
Pédelaborde in the twenty-ninth hour of a confinement that seemed to
the prisoner to have endured for weeks, in the character of one whose
feet are beautiful upon the mountains. Undeterred by the fact that he
possessed not the vestige of a voice, the dentist’s nephew had recourse
to the method of communicating intelligence to one in durance vile,
traditionally hit upon by the Sieur Blondel. A free translation of the
lay is appended:

  “_You have not cooked his goose!
  (Although at the first go-off it appeared uncommonly like it!)
  They’ve plugged him up with tow--(I mean the surgeons)
  If he does not inflame--(and the beggar is as cool as a cucumber
   and as strong as a drayhorse!)
  He may possibly get over it.
  So keep up your pecker!_” sang Pédelaborde.

Upon the captive Cœur-de-Lion the song of the Troubadour could hardly
have had a more tonic effect. Hector sang out joyfully in answer:

“A thousand thanks, old boy!” and a savage access of appetite
following on the revulsion from black despair to immense relief, he
promptly plumped down on his stiff knees, and began to rummage in the
semi-obscurity for one of the stale bread-rations previously pitched
away in disgust. And had found the farinaceous brickbat, and got
his sharp young teeth in it even as Pédelaborde was collared by the
curly-whiskered, red-faced, purple-nosed ex-Sergeant of the Municipal
Guard in charge of the Penal Department, and handed over to the School
Police, as one arrested in the act of clandestinely communicating with
a prisoner in the cells.

The civil ordeal beneath the shining spectacles of the
Director-in-Chief, assisted by the six Professors, the School
Administrator, and the Treasurer, proved less awful than the culprit
had reason to expect.

An imposition; Plutarch’s “Life of Marcus Crassus” to be written out
fairly without blots or erasures, three times, was inflicted. The
address of the Director-in-Chief moved five out of the six Professors
to tears, so stately was it, so paternal, so moving in its expressions.
The sixth Professor would have wept also, had he not, with his chin
wedged in his stock and his hands folded upon his ample waistcoat, been
soundly, peacefully, sleeping in his chair.

Monseigneur le Duc had graciously entreated, said the
Director-in-Chief, clemency for one whose young, revengeful hand
had well-nigh deprived him of his second son, and plunged himself
and his exalted family in anxiety of the most cruel. The future of
the young sufferer, who, the Director-in-Chief was grateful to say,
was pronounced by the surgeons to be progressing favorably--(“Then
he was not inflamed!” ... thought Hector, with a rush of infinite
relief.)--the future of M. Alain de Moulny must inevitably be changed
by this deplorable occurrence--a profession less arduous than the
military must now inevitably be his. Let him who had reft the crown
of laurels from the temples of his comrade reflect upon the grave
consequences of his act. The Director-in-Chief ended, rapping the table
as a signal to the Professor who had not wept, to wake up, “Pupil 130,
you may now return to your studies, but, pending the decision of the
Military Tribunal, you are Still Provisionally Under Arrest.”

The verdict of the Military Tribunal was in favor of the prisoner.
It was decided that Pupil No. 130, roused to choler by an expression
injurious to his family honor, had challenged Pupil No. 127 with
justification. Having already undergone three days’ imprisonment, no
further punishment than a reprimand for leaving the dormitory before
beat of drum would be administered by the Court, which rose as M. the
General gave the signal. And Hector was free.

But for many days after the completion of those three unblotted copies
of “Marcus Crassus” he did not see de Moulny.... He hung about the
Infirmary, waiting for scraps of intelligence as a hungry cat was wont
to hang about the kitchen quarters, wistful-eyed, hollow-flanked,
waiting for eleemosynary scraps. One of the two Sisters of Charity in
charge took pity on him, perhaps both of them did.... A day came when
he was admitted into the long bare sunshiny ward.... At the end nearest
the high west window that commanded a view of the flowery garden-beds
and neat green grass-plats surrounding the house of Monsieur the
Director-in-Chief, upon a low iron bedstead from which the curtains had
been stripped away, lay stretched a long body, to which an unpleasant
effect of bloated corpulence was imparted by the wicker cage that held
the bedclothes up.... The long face that topped the body was very
white, a lock of ashen blonde hair drooped over the knobby forehead;
the pouting underlip hung lax; the blue eyes, less stony than of old,
looked out of hollowed orbits; a sparse and scattered growth of fluffy
reddish hairs had started on the lank jaws and long, powerful chin.
Hector, conscious of his own egg-smooth cheeks, knew a momentary pang
of envy of that incipient beard.... And then as de Moulny grinned in
the old cheerful boyish way, holding out a long attenuated arm and
bony hand in welcome, something strangling seemed to grip him by the
throat....

Only de Moulny saw his tears. The Sister, considerately busy at
the other end of a long avenue of tenantless beds with checked
side-curtains, assiduously folded bandages at a little table, as the
sobbing cry broke forth:

“Oh, Alain, I always loved you!--I would rather you had killed me than
have lived to see you lie here! Oh! Alain!--Alain!”

“It does not matter,” said de Moulny, but his long upper lip quivered
and the water stood in his own eyes. “They will make a priest of me
now, that is all. She”--he jerked his chin in the direction of the busy
Sister--“would say the foil-thrust was a special grace. Tell me how
Paris is looking? I have not seen the slut for--how long?” He began
a laugh, and broke off in the middle, and gave a grimace of pain.
“_Dame!_--but that hurts!” he said before he could stop, and saw his
smart reflected in the other’s shamed, wet face, and winced at it.

“Pupil 127 must not excite himself or elevate his voice above a whisper
in speaking. The orders of the Surgeon attending are stringent. It is
my duty to see that they are obeyed.”

Sister Edouard-Antoine had spoken. Hector rose up and saluted as the
nun came gliding down the avenue of beds towards them, her beads
clattering and swinging by her side, her black robes sweeping the
well-scrubbed boards, her finger raised in admonition, solicitude on
the mild face within the _coif_ of starched white linen....

“They shall be obeyed, my Sister,” said de Moulny in an elaborate
whisper. The Sister smiled and nodded, and went back to her work.
Hector, on a rush-bottomed chair by the low bed, holding the hot, thin,
bony hand, began to say:

“I went out yesterday--being Wednesday. Paris is looking as she always
looks--always will look, until England and Russia and Germany join
forces to invade France, and batter down her forts and spike her
batteries, and pound her churches and towers and palaces to powder with
newly-invented projectiles, bigger than any shell the world has ever
yet seen, filled with some fulminate of a thousand times the explosive
power of gunpowder....”

“Go it!” whispered de Moulny. Then a spark of fanatical enthusiasm
kindled in his pale blue eyes. “An explosive of a thousand times the
power of gunpowder, you say!” he repeated. “Remember that inspection,
and the grimy neck and black hands that cost me my Corporal’s _galon_!
I had been working in the Department of Chemistry that morning....
I had got all that black on me through a blow-up in the laboratory.
_Nom d’un petit bonhomme!_ I thought I had discovered it--then!--that
explosive that is to send gunpowder to the wall. Listen----”

“Do not excite yourself!” begged Hector, “or the Sister will turn me
out.”

De Moulny went on: “I shall pursue the thing no further, for how shall
one who is to be a Catholic priest spend his time inventing explosives
to destroy men? But--one day you may take up the thread of discovery
where I left off.”

“Or where the discovery went off!” suggested Hector.

De Moulny grinned, though his eyes were serious.

“Just so. But listen. I had been reading of the experiments made
in 1832 by Braconnot of Nancy, who converted woody fiber into a
highly-combustible body by treating it with nitric acid. And I dipped
a piece of carded cotton-wool in nitric, and washed it. Then I dipped
it in concentrated sulphuric. The sulphuric not only dehydrated the
nitric--_saisissez_?--but took up the water. Then it occurred to me to
test the expansive power of the substance in combustion by packing it
into a paper cone and lighting it. Well, I was packing the stuff with
the end of an aluminum spatula, into the little paper case, when--but
you must have heard?”

“Ps’st! Br’roum! Boum!” Hector nodded. “I heard, most certainly! But
let me now tell you of Wednesday.” He leaned